## Reusable Baby Wipes

Shortly after our little boy was born last year we made the switchover to using reusable baby wipes/wet wipes and cloth nappies, driven mainly by ecological concerns, however there has been added economic benefits. 

#### How much money does it save?

We bought a kit from Cheeky Wipes, as it's a UK based company. Our initial spend was around £30 for 25 wipes, a clean wipes box, a bag and a bottle of lavender and chamomile essential oil to keep the wet wipes fresh. We didn't bother with the larger kit that includes a "dirty" box as we made the transition to cloth nappies at the same time and knew we would be having a nappy bucket available to put used wipes in. 
I have since ordered another 25 wipes when we started weaning to cover the extra use wiping sticky hands and faces but find that this more than enough wipes, these cost around £15. I've run out of the bottle of oil that came with the wipes now after around 8 months, so have bought a new bottle of lavender oil for a couple of pounds. Which gives a total spend of around £40. 

In contrast with my daughter we would use around 1 box of 12 packets of disposable baby wipes which would cos us approximately £9-£11. 10 months in and we would have spent around £100 on wet wipes with another, maybe, 18-24 months before toilet training. Potential savings if he is toilet trained at the same time as his sister around 2 and a half years the total cost of using wet wipes would be about £300, compared to £40 on reusable baby wipes. As well as the added environmental benefits of using less resources and throwing away less. 

#### Our experience 

We were converts to reusable wet wipes the first poopy nappy we changed with them. With disposable wet wipes we found that there was often times we'd need sooo many of them as they just seemed to spread the solids around, whereas reusable wet wipes clean up so much better. They are a bit more faff and not as easy to use when we go out, we have to either take dry wipes and hope there will be a sink available or take a bottle of water to dampen them down with us; or we take pre-wetted wipes out with us. I tend to put them inside a silicone zip lock bag to prevent them from soaking everything else in the changing bag. 
We don't bother to soak the used wipes, we rinse any solids off them, then put them in the nappy bin. The nappies are washed every other day on a short hot wash to rinse them through and then a long hot wash to properly wash them out. Once washed we stack them inside the "clean" wet wipes box with water, 2 drops of lavender oil and a squirt of almond or other carrier oil, I've found this helps to lift any remaining residue on baby's bottom. I like the options that Cheeky wipes have and use coloured wipes for bottoms and white wipes for faces and hands. We use the 100% cotton wipes. There are microfibre and bamboo alternatives but I'm happy with the cotton ones. You could achieve the same thing with a packet of cheap flannel cloths though for a fraction of a cost and I would definitely recommend this as an interim even if only for hands and faces after mealtimes, although the cheeky wipes are much thicker and softer for baby skin. The "ick" factor of having to wash cloths that have poop on them is definitely there but the washing machine handles most of this and we ensure we run a cleaning cycle regularly. Also having toilet trained one child washing wet and dirty clothes becomes a lot less yucky. 

#### Our Conclusion

So to summarise, using reusable wet wipes has and is saving us a sizeable chunk of money whilst allowing us to reduce the amount of waste we produce. They are a bit more time consuming and require a bit more organisation when going out but there are fairly simple solutions to these and you could use disposable wipes on occasions but would still be reducing costs and your environmental impact. If you're not sure whether you are ready to make the change to reusable wipes and spend the money, you can use cheap flannel cloths. Give it a go, you'll be saving money and the planet! 
